docs: add initial GPU explanation (#18)
charmed-hpc/docs: explanation/gpus/slurmconf.md

(slurmconf)=
# Slurm enlistment

> To allow cluster users to submit jobs requesting GPUs, detected GPUs are automatically added to the [Generic RESource (GRES) Slurm configuration](https://slurm.schedmd.com/gres.html). This is a feature in Slurm which enables scheduling of arbitrary generic resources, including GPUs.

Author: Fixed now.

## Device details

GPU details are gathered by [`pynvml`](https://pypi.org/project/nvidia-ml-py/), the official Python bindings for the Nvidia management library, which enables GPU counts, associated device files and model names to be queried from the drivers. For compatibility with Slurm configuration files, retrieved model names are converted to lowercase and white space is replaced with underscores. “Tesla T4” becomes `tesla_t4`, for example.

## Slurm configuration

> Each GPU-equipped node is added to the `gres.conf` configuration file as its own `NodeName` entry, following the format defined in the [Slurm `gres.conf` documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/gres.conf.html). Individual `NodeName` entries are used over an entry per GRES resource to provide greater support for heterogeneous environments, such as a cluster where the same model of GPU is not consistently the same device file across compute nodes.

Author: I've revised this to give more information on what the `NodeName` parameter is and why it's used. Hopefully things are a bit clearer now. The table I've added to explain the parameters might be unnecessary repetition, given we already link to the `gres.conf` docs where they're explained in greater detail. Let me know what you think.

I've also removed the comment on heterogeneous environments as, while it's true, the real motivation is so we can have a single `gres.conf` file on the `slurmctld` controller that all compute nodes share (rather than an individual `gres.conf` per compute node). The greater support is an effect of that.

> In `slurm.conf`, the configuration for GPU-equipped nodes has a comma-separated list in its `Gres=` element, giving the name, type and count for each GPU on the node.

Author: Done.

## Slurm configuration

Each GPU-equipped node is added to the `gres.conf` configuration file following the format defined in the [Slurm `gres.conf` documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/gres.conf.html). A single `gres.conf` is shared by all compute nodes in the cluster, using the optional `NodeName` specification to define GPU resources per node. Each line in `gres.conf` consists of the following parameters:

| Parameter  | Value                                                      |
| ---------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| `NodeName` | Node the `gres.conf` line applies to.                      |
| `Name`     | Name of the generic resource. Always `gpu` here.           |
| `Type`     | GPU model name.                                            |

> | `File`     | Path of the device file(s) associated with this GPU model. |

Reviewer: Typically I italicize filenames like _slurm.conf_ and _gres.conf_ rather than encapsulate in inline code blocks. That way it's clear to me at least that I am referring to something technical that isn't code in a sentence. You can see it in the [README](https://github.com/charmed-hpc/slurmutils/blob/main/README.md) for `slurmutils`.

Kinda just highlights something I started doing and stuck with, but highlights that we should determine now how we should reference important file names in our documentation. Italicize, code block, or something else? Thoughts about this @AshleyCliff @dsloanm @jedel1043?

[side note]: @dsloanm I like the table :sunglasses:

Author: Agreed using different formats for file names and code makes sense. Italics works for me - updated.

Reviewer 2: Agreed that it should be different than how code is distinguished from regular text; italics for filenames works well.

---
relatedlinks: "[Slurm&#32;Workload&#32;Manager&#32;-&#32;gres.conf](https://slurm.schedmd.com/gres.conf.html)"
---

(slurmconf)=
# Slurm enlistment

To allow cluster users to submit jobs requesting GPUs, detected GPUs are automatically added to the [Generic RESource (GRES) Slurm configuration](https://slurm.schedmd.com/gres.html). GRES is a feature in Slurm which enables scheduling of arbitrary generic resources, including GPUs.

## Device details

GPU details are gathered by [`pynvml`](https://pypi.org/project/nvidia-ml-py/), the official Python bindings for the Nvidia management library, which enables GPU counts, associated device files and model names to be queried from the drivers. For compatibility with Slurm configuration files, retrieved model names are converted to lowercase and white space is replaced with underscores. “Tesla T4” becomes `tesla_t4`, for example.

## Slurm configuration

> Each GPU-equipped node is added to the _gres.conf_ configuration file following the format defined in the [Slurm _gres.conf_ documentation](https://slurm.schedmd.com/gres.conf.html). A single _gres.conf_ is shared by all compute nodes in the cluster, using the optional `NodeName` specification to define GPU resources per node. Each line in _gres.conf_ consists of the following parameters:

Reviewer 2: Does the gres.conf file only include gpu configurations? If not, emphasize that the table below is specific to gpus and the values can be different for other cases.

Reviewer 2: The phrasing in the refs is good - "uses the following parameters to define a GPU resource"

Author: Replaced with that phrasing.

Slurm does support other resources in gres.conf but in our case it can only be GPUs (because we haven't used it for anything else yet).

| Parameter  | Value                                                      |
| ---------- | ---------------------------------------------------------- |
| `NodeName` | Node the _gres.conf_ line applies to.                      |
| `Name`     | Name of the generic resource. Always `gpu` here.           |
| `Type`     | GPU model name.                                            |
| `File`     | Path of the device file(s) associated with this GPU model. |

> In _slurm.conf_, the configuration for GPU-equipped nodes has a comma-separated list in its `Gres=` element, giving the name, type, and count for each GPU on the node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In _slurm.conf_, the `Gres=` element of each line provides a comma-separated list of GPU-equipped node configurations. The format for each configuration is: `<name>:<type>:<count>`, as seen in the example below.
```

Reviewer 2: That's probably not quite right, but some way to make the pattern explicit and then refer to the example - this way if they don't scroll the text in the code example they still see the explicit pattern.

Author: Reworded this with the example pattern and pointing the reader to the example. I also added a bit more on when the `Gres=` element is and isn't included.
